---
title: Phages introduction
date: 2022-06-28
author: Runhang
---
An understudied field of research has gained increasing attentions recently after scientists saw numerous viral particals in the soil, ocean, bacterial cells and ,etc by using fluorescence electron microscope or transmission electron microscope. The virues that infect bacteria are called bacterialphages or phages, mean "to eat" in Latin. It is now recognized as the most abundant biological entities (not an organism but a molecular machine) on the planet. So, the article will introduce what do we know about them, and what remains mysterious? 

**Lysogeny** is the phage genome nested in bacterial host chromosomes. One copy of phage genome will be made during each replication of a bacterium. Lysogeny phage, or prophage, is usually temperate phage that have a long-term relationship with bacteria. 

**Piggback-the-winner** is a strategy that prophages use to replicate together with the more competitive bacterial hosts. 

**Lysis** occurs when a type of more virulent phage replicates its genome and packaging bacterial genome inside bacterial cells, ending up lysing the cells and releasing all the "free" phages. This type of virulent phage is most studied in the lab than temperate behaviors of prophage in nature enviroments. 

**Kill-the-winner** is a strategy for virulent phages who are typically obligately lytic, killing their hosts after infection. 

**Superinfection exclusion** is an outcome of lysogeny, where the prophage makes the host immune aginst infection by closely related or unrelated phages. 

**Phage can direct the metabolism of its host**

1. The phage genome bears many AMGs (Auxiliary metabolic genes) that can participate in host metabolic pathways. 

2. The interplay between nutrient demand and availability and the plasticity of the metabolic state of "virocell" may influence the lysis-lysogeny decision. For example, during spring-summer seasonal transitions, temperate virues switch from lysogeny to lytic replication as bacterial production increases (Brum et al., 2016). 

3. Virus-encoded tRNA can also serve to enrich the level of tRNAs that match the viral codon usage. 

**Phage infections lower the global transcription but not protein abundances of bacterial cells** (https://www.nature.com/articles/s41396-019-0580-z). 

1. Such effects vary greatly among phages. The two Pseudoalteromonas phages, HP1 and HS3, used in this study share only 1% of their genome. Both of them can infect the same host effectively. 

2. Fitness is different. 

3. The host-phage codon dissimilarity can reflect extent of the metabolic demand to synthesize proteins for phages. A high host-phage codon dissimilarity is considered as reprogramming the host transcription to meet the nutritional needs of phage infection/replication. In contrast, a low host-phage codon dissimilarity is indicative of the virocell providing intracellular environment and resources needed for infection sucess. They are two different strategies. 

4. Phages with little complementarity need to reprogram cellular metabolism prior to lysis. The burst size is smaller than a phage that has greater complementarility with host. That is to say the later one is putatively "temperate" and can co-exist with host for a relatively longer time before burst. Alternatively, it can become a prophage via lysogeny. 

**Counting viral particles is not equivalent to counting virues**

1. Therefore, a commonly wrong statement is that viruses outnumber cells in the environment by 10 times. How can virocell (the phage-infected cells)  are more abundant than visible cells when they are physiologically a subpopulation of cells in the enviroment. 

2. This does not reduce the importance of viruses as viral genomes greatly outnumber cellular genomes in the biosphere. 

**Up to 40% of bacteria present in bacterioplankton are infected by viruses (Suttle, 2007).**

**It is intriguing that most genes in viral genomes have no cellular homologues and only a small percentage can be traced to cellular ancestors.**

1. In fact, the integration of viral genes into cellular genomes is probably more frequent than steel genes from the host. 

2. One can claim that cells are gaint pickpockets of viral genes, not vice versa (Patrick Forterre 2012, *ISME J*). 

3. In metagenomic data analyses, it is a challenging work to distinguish cellular genes from viral genes. To build a complementary database with viral proteins is the first step. This database is a reservoir of biologically information stored in viral genomes. These are orphan genes with no homologues in current datebases or viral-specific genes. The virocells are considered as cradles of new genes. 

**Bacterial cell surface has receptor for bacteriophages, such as LamB of *E. coli*, serves as an entry point by phage lamda.**

1. The deletion of *LamB* in *E. coli* will abolish superinfection (phage infection of already phage-infected bacterium or lysogeny). This is one explaination of more free phage in the bacterial culture because lysogenys become immune to superinfection.

2. Meanwhile, the lytic process is still happening, leading to accumulated free phage in the culture. 

3. Hoyland-kroghsbo et al. (2013) revealed that N-acyl-l-homoserine lactone (AHL), a quorum-sensing signal, supresses λ receptors on the cell surface (measured by SDS-page). As a result, the AHL-induced quorum-sensing activates host immune defense to phage superinfection. (DOI:https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00362-12)

**Factors affect phage infection/ cell fate ([Zheng et al., 2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.034))** 

1. The presence of absence of prophage
2. Cell size 
3. MOI (multiplicity of infection, the number of phages infecting an individual cell. A high level of MOI or API (average phage input) can result in 100% lysogens. 
4. Location (pole, mid-cell, which contains key protein such as ManY for DNA injection)

The reason for the inadequacy of single-cell resolution is that the cell-fate decision is achieved through a hierarchy of decisions at the sub-cellular level. 

**Teachniques of determining whether cells are going through lysis or lysogenic process.([Trinh et al., 2017](https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14341))**

During lysis process, phages compete resources for DNA replication. During lysogenic process, phages cooperate to propagate for integration. 




